README.md, before:

# Lotus

This repository contains the source code for the Digital Linguistics (DLx) [Lotus app][app], a web app for managing linguistic data.

[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/digitallinguistics/app)][issues]
[![tests](https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/actions/workflows/test.yml)
[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/digitallinguistics/app)][GitHub]
[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/digitallinguistics/app?style=social)](https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/stargazers)

* [Try out the Lotus app!][app]
* [Report a problem or request a feature.][new-issue]
* [Contribute to the project.](./.github/CONTRIBUTING.md)

<!-- LINKS -->
[app]:       https://app.digitallinguistics.io
[GitHub]:    https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app
[issues]:    https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/issues
[new-issue]: https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/issues/new

Commit message:

DOCS: add attribution to readme (#17)
closes #17

README.md, after:

# Lotus

This repository contains the source code for the Digital Linguistics (DLx) [Lotus app][app], a web app for managing linguistic data.

[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/digitallinguistics/app)][issues]
[![tests](https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/actions/workflows/test.yml)
[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/digitallinguistics/app)][GitHub]
[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/digitallinguistics/app?style=social)](https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/stargazers)

* [Try out the Lotus app!][app]
* [Report a problem or request a feature.][new-issue]
* [Contribute to the project.](./.github/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Attribution

If you use the Lotus app in your work, please consider citing it similar to the following model:

> Hieber, Daniel W. 2021. Lotus (@digitallinguistics/app). https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app

<!-- LINKS -->
[app]:       https://app.digitallinguistics.io
[GitHub]:    https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app
[issues]:    https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/issues
[new-issue]: https://github.com/digitallinguistics/app/issues/new
